BCA Model Question Paper Solution

Subject: Data Visualization using Tableau
Semester: III

MODULE - I (Excel Basics)

Q1(a). What is cell formatting in Excel? Explain its types. (5 Marks)

Answer:
Cell Formatting means changing how the data looks in a cell without changing the real value. It makes the spreadsheet look neat, attractive, and easy to read.

Types of Cell Formatting:

Number Formatting: Changes how numbers look (e.g., adding currency symbols like ₹ or $, showing percentages %, or changing date formats).

Font Formatting: Changes the text style. You can make text Bold, Italic, or Underlined. You can also change the font size, type, and color.

Alignment Formatting: Changes where the text sits in the cell (Left, Right, Center). It also includes "Merge & Center" (combining cells) and "Wrap Text" (fitting long text in one box).

Borders and Shading: Adds lines (borders) around cells and changes the background color (shading) to highlight important data.

Cell Styles: These are ready-made designs (like "Heading" or "Good/Bad") that you can apply quickly.

Q1(b). Define a macro in Excel. Describe the step-by-step process of recording a macro to automate repetitive tasks. (5 Marks)

Answer:
Definition: A Macro is a tool in Excel that records a set of actions or steps you perform. You can save these steps and run them later to automatically repeat the same task. It is used to save time on work you do often.

Steps to Record a Macro:

Open your Excel file.

Go to the View tab (or Developer tab).

Click on Macros and select Record Macro.

A box will appear. Give your macro a Name (no spaces allowed). You can also choose a shortcut key (like Ctrl+Shift+M).

Click OK. Excel is now recording everything you do.

Perform the task you want to automate (e.g., formatting a table or calculating a sum).

When finished, go back to View > Macros and click Stop Recording.

Q1(c). Explain the steps to create a PivotTable in Excel with example. (10 Marks)

Answer:
A PivotTable is a powerful tool to summarize and analyze large amounts of data quickly. It helps you find patterns or totals without writing formulas manually.

Steps to Create a PivotTable:

Select Data: Click anywhere inside your dataset (ensure your data has headers like Product, Region, Sales).

Insert: Go to the Insert tab on the top ribbon.

Click PivotTable: Click the "PivotTable" button.

Create Box: A box will pop up asking where to put the table. Choose "New Worksheet" and click OK.

PivotTable Fields: On the right side, you will see a panel called "PivotTable Fields".

Drag and Drop: Drag your columns into the four areas:

Rows: (e.g., Drag "Region" here).

Values: (e.g., Drag "Sales Amount" here to get the total).

Columns: (Optional, e.g., Drag "Product" here).

Filters: (Optional).

Example:
Imagine you have a list of sales:

Laptop - North - 50,000

Mobile - South - 30,000

Laptop - West - 40,000

If you create a PivotTable and drag Region to Rows and Sales to Values, Excel will automatically show:

North: 50,000

South: 30,000

West: 40,000

Grand Total: 120,000

OR

Q2(a). What is conditional formatting and how is it applied in Excel? (6 Marks)

Answer:
Conditional Formatting is a feature that changes the color or style of a cell automatically based on a rule or condition. It helps you visually spot trends, such as high sales or failing grades.

How to Apply it:

Select Data: Highlight the cells you want to format (e.g., a column of marks).

Home Tab: Go to the Home tab.

Click Conditional Formatting: Click the button in the Styles group.

Choose a Rule: Select a rule type. Common options are:

Highlight Cell Rules: (e.g., "Greater Than 50" creates a rule to color numbers over 50).

Top/Bottom Rules: (e.g., Highlight the "Top 10 items").

Data Bars: Adds colored bars inside the cell based on the value.

Color Scales: Changes cell color from green (high) to red (low).

Finish: Click the rule you want, and Excel applies the formatting immediately.

Q2(b). Describe different data types in Excel with examples. (6 Marks)

Answer:
Excel allows different types of data in cells to handle information correctly.

Number: General numeric values for math.

Example: 123, 45.67

Currency: Used for money. It adds symbols like ₹ or $.

Example: ₹1,200.00

Accounting: Similar to currency but aligns the symbols neatly. Negative numbers often appear in parentheses.

Example: (₹500.00)

Short Date: Shows the date simply.

Example: 30-07-2025

Long Date: Shows the full date with the day name.

Example: Wednesday, July 30, 2025

Time: Shows hours and minutes.

Example: 10:30 AM

Percentage: Multiplies by 100 and adds a % sign.

Example: 0.75 becomes 75%

Q2(c). Explain IF function and VLOOKUP function with example. (8 Marks)

Answer:

1. IF Function:
The IF function checks a condition. If the condition is true, it gives one result; if false, it gives another.

Syntax: =IF(Condition, Value_if_True, Value_if_False)

Example: Checking if a student passed.

Formula: =IF(C2>=35, "Pass", "Fail")

Explanation: If the value in cell C2 is 35 or more, it shows "Pass". If less, it shows "Fail".

2. VLOOKUP Function:
VLOOKUP (Vertical Lookup) searches for a value in the first column of a table and returns a value from another column in the same row.

Syntax: =VLOOKUP(lookup_value, table_array, column_index_num, [range_lookup])

Example: Finding a student's name using their Roll Number (101).

Formula: =VLOOKUP(101, A2:C10, 2, FALSE)

Explanation: It looks for "101" in the first column of the range A2:C10. When it finds it, it returns the name from the 2nd column.

MODULE - II (Introduction to Tableau)

Q3(a). Illustrate the four types of joins available in Tableau. Use the below datasets to write example. (10 Marks)

Answer:
A Join in Tableau combines data from two tables based on a common field. Using the provided datasets (Orders and Customers) where Customer_ID is the common key:

1. Inner Join:

Definition: Returns only the rows where there is a match in both tables.

Result: Only customers C001, C002, and C004 appear because they exist in both the Orders and Customers lists.

Data Example:

O101, C001, Chair, Ravi Kumar

O102, C002, Table, Anita Reddy

2. Left Join:

Definition: Returns all rows from the Left table (Orders) and matched rows from the Right table (Customers). Unmatched rows get NULL values.

Result: All Orders (O101-O105) are shown. Orders O103 (C003) and O105 (C005) will show "Null" for Customer Name because those IDs don't exist in the Customers table.

Data Example:

O103, C003, Laptop, Null (Name)

3. Right Join:

Definition: Returns all rows from the Right table (Customers) and matched rows from the Left table (Orders).

Result: All Customers are shown. C006 (Priya) appears, but since she has no order, her Order columns will be Null.

Data Example:

Null (Order), C006, Priya Singh

4. Full Outer Join:

Definition: Returns all rows from both tables. When there is no match, it fills the gaps with NULLs.

Result: Shows all orders and all customers, regardless of whether they match.

Q3(b). Create a sales dataset and apply sales and profit calculations field and explain the scenario in detail. (10 Marks)

Answer:
Scenario:
You are analyzing retail data. Your dataset contains the Sales Price and the Cost Price for items, but it does not have a "Profit" column. You need to use a Calculated Field in Tableau to derive this insight.

Step 1: The Dataset
Assume the following data exists in Tableau:

Product: Laptop

Sales Amount: 50,000

Cost Amount: 40,000

Step 2: Steps to Create Calculated Field

Navigate: Go to the Analysis menu or right-click in the Data Pane.

Select: Click Create Calculated Field.

Name: Name the field "Total Profit".

Formula: Enter the formula:
[Sales Amount] - [Cost Amount]

Apply: Click OK. The new field appears in the Measures pane.

Step 3: Explanation of Scenario
By creating this field, you can now drag "Total Profit" to the rows shelf. Tableau will calculate 50,000 - 40,000 and display 10,000 as the profit. This allows you to visualize which products are actually making money, rather than just generating revenue.

OR

Q4(a). What is Tableau? Difference between Google Data Studio and Tableau? (7 Marks)

Answer:
Tableau is a powerful data visualization tool used by analysts to visualize data and get clear opinions based on analysis. It connects to various data sources and allows users to create interactive dashboards with a simple drag-and-drop interface.

Difference between Google Data Studio (GDS) and Tableau:

Feature

Google Data Studio (GDS)

Tableau

Introduction

Launched by Google in 2016.

Launched by Salesforce/Tableau in 2013.

Cost

Free to use (requires Google account).

Desktop version is paid ($35-$70).

Performance

Good for basic dashboards; limited tools.

World-leading performance; handles complex data well.

Connections

Limited connections (mostly Google ecosystem).

Connects to 60+ data sources (SQL, Excel, Cloud).

Security

Supports access sharing and password protection.

Highly secure with granular row-level permissions.

Q4(b). Describe the Tableau design flow, from data connection to dashboard creation. (7 Marks)

Answer:
The Tableau Design Flow involves these sequential steps:

Connect to Data Source:

Open Tableau and connect to files (Excel, CSV) or Servers (SQL, Oracle).

Build Data Views:

Drag fields from the Data Pane to Rows and Columns shelves to create basic charts (e.g., Bar charts, Line graphs).

Enhance the Views:

Add filters, labels, colors, and tooltips to make the visualization informative and attractive.

Create Worksheets:

A worksheet is where you analyze specific parts of data. You create multiple worksheets for different insights.

Create and Organize Dashboards:

Combine multiple worksheets into a single Dashboard view to compare data side-by-side.

Create a Story:

Link worksheets and dashboards in a sequence to tell a data narrative step-by-step.

Q4(c). Explain the data types in Tableau? (6 Marks)

Answer:
Tableau classifies data into specific types to handle them correctly:

String (Abc): Text values. (e.g., "Customer Name").

Number (#): Numeric values (integers or decimals) used for calculations. (e.g., Sales, Profit).

Date & Date Time: Calendar dates and timestamps. (e.g., 01-Jan-2025).

Boolean (T/F): Logical values representing True or False.

Geographic (Globe Icon): Values used for maps. (e.g., City, Country, Postal Code).

Cluster/Mixed: Columns that contain a mix of different data types (e.g., numbers and text in the same column).

MODULE - III (Visualization)

Q5(a). List out the operators in Tableau in detail? (8 Marks)

Answer:
Operators are symbols used to perform calculations.

Arithmetic Operators: For math.

+ (Addition)

- (Subtraction)

* (Multiplication)

/ (Division)

Relational (Comparison) Operators: To compare two values. Returns True or False.

> (Greater than)

< (Less than)

>= (Greater than or equal to)

<= (Less than or equal to)

= (Equal to)

!= (Not equal to)

Logical Operators: Combines multiple conditions.

AND: True if both conditions are true.

OR: True if at least one condition is true.

NOT: Reverses the result (True becomes False).

Q5(b). Discuss in detail the differences among FIXED, INCLUDE, and EXCLUDE LOD expressions. (7 Marks)

Answer:
LOD (Level of Detail) expressions allow you to calculate values at a different level than what is shown in your main view.

FIXED:

Definition: Calculates a value using only the specific dimensions you mention, ignoring other filters in the view.

Example: { FIXED [Region] : SUM([Sales]) }

Result: This calculates total sales per Region, even if your view is filtered by State or City. It is a "Fixed" number.

INCLUDE:

Definition: Calculates at a more detailed level than the view. It adds a dimension to the calculation.

Example: { INCLUDE [Customer ID] : AVG([Sales]) }

Result: Even if your view just shows "Region," this calculates the average sales per customer first, then averages that for the Region.

EXCLUDE:

Definition: Calculates at a less detailed level than the view. It removes a dimension from the calculation.

Example: { EXCLUDE [Region] : SUM([Sales]) }

Result: If your view shows Sales by Region, this calculation ignores Region and gives the total Global Sales.

Q5(c). Write the steps to create a calculated field in Tableau with example. (5 Marks)

Answer:
Steps:

Connect to your data in Tableau.

Go to the Analysis menu at the top OR click the small arrow next to the Search bar in the Data pane.

Select Create Calculated Field.

A popup window opens. Enter a Name for the field (e.g., "Profit Ratio").

Type your Formula in the box.

Click Apply and OK.

Example:
Calculating a 10% tax on sales.

Name: Tax Amount

Formula: [Sales] * 0.10

OR

Q6(a). Difference between ISNULL, ZN and IFNULL with examples. (10 Marks)

Answer:
These functions handle missing (Null) data.

ISNULL:

Function: Checks if a cell is empty. Returns True if empty, False if it has data.

Example: ISNULL([Profit])

Result: If Profit is missing, it says True.

ZN (Zero Null):

Function: Checks a value. If it is a number, it keeps it. If it is Null (empty), it converts it to Zero (0). This is useful for math so calculations don't break.

Example: ZN([Profit])

Result: If Profit is null, the result is 0.

IFNULL:

Function: Checks a value. If it is NOT null, it returns that value. If it IS null, it returns a second value that you specify.

Example: IFNULL([Profit], 0)

Result: This does the exact same thing as ZN (returns Profit or 0).

Example 2: IFNULL([Category], "Other") -> If category is missing, it writes "Other".

Q6(b). Write a calculated field to check if Profit is null... Write a CASE expression to classify Category... (10 Marks)

Answer:

Part 1: Check for Null Profit
We need a formula that returns "Missing" if null, and "Recorded" if not.

Formula:

IF ISNULL([Profit]) THEN "Missing"
ELSE "Recorded"
END



Part 2: CASE Expression for Category
We need to rename categories based on the question.

Formula:

CASE [Category]
WHEN 'Furniture' THEN 'Furnishing'
WHEN 'Technology' THEN 'Tech Items'
WHEN 'Office Supplies' THEN 'Office Use'
END



MODULE - IV (Sort and Filter)

Q7(a). Compare and contrast Groups, Bins, and Hierarchies in Tableau with its working. (10 Marks)

Answer:

Feature

Groups

Bins

Hierarchies

Definition

Combines specific items into one bigger category manually.

Creates equal-sized intervals (buckets) for numerical data.

Arranges data in levels (Parent to Child) for drilling down.

Used For

Simplifying data. (e.g., combining "Apple", "Banana" into "Fruit").

Creating Histograms. (e.g., grouping Age into 0-10, 11-20).

Drilling down data. (e.g., Year -> Quarter -> Month).

Data Type

Works best on Dimensions (Text).

Works only on Measures (Numbers).

Works on related Dimensions.

How to Create

Select items -> Right Click -> Group.

Right Click Measure -> Create -> Bins.

Drag one field on top of another field.

Example

Grouping "India", "China", "Japan" as "Asia".

Grouping Sales into buckets of 1000 (0-1000, 1000-2000).

Location: Country -> State -> City.

Q7(b). Describe how to apply conditional filters in Tableau. Using the dataset below, filter and display only those items where the Amount is greater than 500. (10 Marks)

Answer:
Conditional Filtering allows you to filter data based on a rule (like "Amount > 500") rather than manually selecting items from a list.

Steps to Apply:

Drag the Item field to the Filters shelf.

A dialog box appears. Click the Condition tab.

Select By Field.

Choose the field Amount.

Select Sum (aggregation) and set the operator to > (Greater than).

Type 500 in the value box.

Click OK.

Applying to the Dataset:
Dataset:

Desk: 450

Pen: 90

Monitor: 800

Phone: 700

Lamp: 150

Process:
Tableau checks every row.

Is Desk (450) > 500? No. (Filtered out)

Is Monitor (800) > 500? Yes. (Kept)

Is Phone (700) > 500? Yes. (Kept)

Resulting Items Displayed:

Monitor (800)

Phone (700)

OR

Q8(a). What do you mean by Filtering in Tableau? Explain the steps different types of filters. (10 Marks)

Answer:
Filtering means restricting the data to show only what you want to see (e.g., showing only Sales from 2024).

Types of Filters:

Quick Filter:

Allows users to change the filter directly on the dashboard (using checkboxes or dropdowns).

Step: Right-click a field in the Filters shelf and select Show Filter.

Context Filter:

This is a "Primary" filter. It filters the data first before any other filters run.

Step: Add a filter, right-click it on the shelf, and select Add to Context. (It turns grey).

Date Filter:

Specific to dates. You can filter by Range (Jan to March), Year, or Relative Date (Last 3 days).

Step: Drag a Date field to Filters and choose "Range of Dates".

Q8(b). Explain Sorting by Field in Visualization. (5 Marks)

Answer:
Sorting by Field means arranging your data (like bars in a chart) based on the values of a measure, rather than alphabetically.

Steps:

Click the drop-down arrow on a Dimension (e.g., Category) in the Rows/Columns shelf.

Click Sort.

Change "Sort By" to Field.

Select the field (e.g., Sales).

Choose Order: Descending (Highest to Lowest).

Result: The category with the highest sales will appear at the top.

Q8(c). Differentiate between Sets and combined sets. (5 Marks)

Answer:

Set: A custom group or subset of data based on a condition.

Example: A set of "Top 10 Customers". It only contains those 10 specific people.

Combined Set: A new set created by merging two existing sets using logic.

Example: If Set A is "Top Customers" and Set B is "Customers from North", a Combined Set can show "Top Customers who are ALSO from North" (Intersection/AND).

MODULE - V (Dashboards & Advanced Charts)

Q9(a). Illustrate the difference between a traditional funnel chart and a funnel chart created in Tableau. (10 Marks)

Answer:
Both charts show a process reducing in size (like a sales pipeline), but they look different.

Traditional Funnel Chart:

Shape: It looks like a smooth inverted triangle or a real funnel.

Alignment: It is perfectly centered.

Usage: It is very visual and easy to understand instantly. It emphasizes the "funnel" shape.

Construction: Often requires complex calculated fields in Tableau to create the "centered" look because Tableau naturally aligns bars to the left.

Tableau Standard Funnel (Stepped):

Shape: It looks like a Bar Chart sorted in descending order.

Alignment: Usually left-aligned (unless modified). It looks like steps going down.

Usage: Better for reading exact values and comparing the length of bars.

Construction: Very easy. Just drag Dimension to Rows, Measure to Size, and sort Descending.

Q9(b). Explain the concept of Bar chart, Line Chart and a Dual Line Chart in Tableau. (10 Marks)

Answer:

Bar Chart:

Concept: Uses rectangular bars to compare categories. The length of the bar shows the value.

Best For: Comparing items (e.g., Sales by Product).

Line Chart:

Concept: Connects data points with a line to show movement.

Best For: Showing trends over time (e.g., Sales growth over 12 months).

Dual Line Chart (Dual Axis):

Concept: Combines TWO line charts on the same graph. One line might use the left axis (e.g., Sales) and the other line uses the right axis (e.g., Profit).

Best For: Comparing two different measures to see if they follow the same trend (e.g., "Did Profit go up when Sales went up?").

OR

Q10(a). Differentiate between tiled object and floating object in tableau dashboard with suitable example. (10 Marks)

Answer:
When adding items (charts, images, text) to a Dashboard, you can place them in two ways:

Feature

Tiled Objects

Floating Objects

Behavior

Snap into a grid layout automatically. They do not overlap.

Can be placed anywhere, pixel-perfect. They can overlap other objects.

Resizing

If you resize one tiled object, the others resize automatically to fit the space.

Resizing one does not affect the others.

Best For

Clean, organized dashboards where everything is aligned perfectly.

placing a logo on top of a chart, or placing a small legend over a map.

Example

A Dashboard split into 4 equal quarters (Top-Left, Top-Right, etc.).

A company Logo placed on the top-right corner, hovering over the background.

Q10(b). Explain the process of adding, applying and managing filters at the dashboard level in tableau. Give one example of business scenario. (10 Marks)

Answer:
Process:

Add Filter: Click on a chart in your Dashboard. Click the small drop-down arrow > Filters > Select the field (e.g., Region). The filter appears on the dashboard.

Apply to All: By default, the filter only changes one chart. To make it control the whole dashboard:

Click the drop-down on the Filter card.

Select Apply to Worksheets > All Using Related Data Sources.

Manage: You can change the style (Radio buttons, Dropdown, Slider) to make it user-friendly.

Business Scenario Example:

Scenario: A National Sales Manager looks at a dashboard showing "Sales Map", "Profit Trend", and "Top Products".

Action: The manager selects "South" in the Region Filter.

Result: Because the filter is applied to the whole dashboard, the Map zooms into the South, the Trend line changes to show only South data, and the Product list updates to show what sells best in the South. This helps the manager analyze that specific region quickly.
