Module I

Q1. Explain the basic structure of an Excel workbook and worksheet.

Think of Excel like a physical notebook.

Workbook: This is the entire file itself (the notebook). It contains all the pages inside it. An Excel file (ending in .xlsx) is a Workbook.

Worksheet (Sheet): These are the individual pages inside the Workbook. You see tabs at the bottom named "Sheet1", "Sheet2", etc. You do your actual work on a worksheet. It is a grid made up of rows and columns.

Q2. Describe different data types in Excel with examples.

Excel creates different types of data differently.

Text: Letters or a mix of letters and numbers (e.g., "Apple", "ID-123"). It aligns to the left.

Number: Digits used for math (e.g., 100, 50.5). It aligns to the right.

Date/Time: Specific formats for calendars and clocks (e.g., "01/01/2023").

Currency: Numbers with money symbols (e.g., $50.00).

Boolean (Logical): Only two values: TRUE or FALSE.

Q3. What is cell formatting in Excel? Explain its types.

Cell formatting changes how data looks without changing the actual data. It makes the sheet easier to read.
Types:

Number Formatting: Changing "0.5" to "50%" or "$0.50".

Font Formatting: Changing text size, color, or making it Bold.

Alignment: Centering text, wrapping text so it fits, or merging cells.

Borders and Fill: Adding lines around cells or coloring the background of a cell.

Q4. Write the syntax and usage of the SUM and AVERAGE functions in Excel.

SUM: Adds up a list of numbers.

Syntax: =SUM(number1, [number2], ...) or =SUM(range)

Example: =SUM(A1:A10) adds all numbers from cell A1 to A10.

AVERAGE: Calculates the mean (average) of a list.

Syntax: =AVERAGE(number1, [number2], ...) or =AVERAGE(range)

Example: =AVERAGE(B1:B5) finds the average of numbers in cells B1 to B5.

Q5. What is conditional formatting and how is it applied in Excel?

This feature changes the color of a cell automatically based on the data inside it.

Usage: To highlight trends or errors. For example, coloring all scores below 35 in Red.

How to Apply:

Select the cells.

Go to the Home tab -> Click Conditional Formatting.

Choose a rule (e.g., "Highlight Cells Rules" -> "Greater Than").

Enter the value and choose a color.

Q6. Explain the steps to create a PivotTable in Excel.

A PivotTable is a tool to summarize large amounts of data quickly without formulas.
Steps:

Click anywhere inside your data.

Go to the Insert tab -> Click PivotTable.

Choose where to place it (New Worksheet or Existing Worksheet).

In the panel on the right, drag fields (columns) into areas: Rows, Columns, Values, and Filters.

Q7. What is linking data across multiple sheets or workbooks?

Linking is the process of connecting cells so that if data changes in one sheet (the source), it automatically updates in another sheet (the destination).

Concept: It creates a live connection.

Syntax Example: =Sheet2!A1 (This formula in Sheet1 pulls data specifically from cell A1 in Sheet2).

Q8. Write the steps to remove duplicates using Power Query.

Select your data table.

Go to Data tab -> Click From Table/Range (this opens Power Query).

In the Power Query Editor window, select the column(s) where you suspect duplicates.

Right-click the column header.

Select Remove Duplicates.

Click Close & Load to bring the clean unique list back to Excel.

Q9. Define what a macro is and explain how to record it in Excel.

A Macro is a recording of a series of steps or commands. You record it once, and then you can play it back to repeat the task automatically.

How to Record:

Go to the Developer tab.

Click Record Macro. Give it a name and a shortcut key (e.g., Ctrl + Shift + M).

Perform the actions you want to save (e.g., formatting a table).

Click Stop Recording.

Now, whenever you press the shortcut, Excel does those steps for you.

Q10. Mention the role of Power Pivot in data transformation.

Power Pivot is an add-in for performing powerful data analysis and creating complex data models.

Role: It handles huge datasets (millions of rows) that normal Excel cannot handle well.

Relationships: Unlike standard Excel, it allows you to create relationships between different tables (like a database) without using VLOOKUP.

Q11. Explain the Excel interface in detail with the functions of its key parts.

The Excel screen has several key parts:

Quick Access Toolbar: Small icons at the very top left (Save, Undo, Redo) for fast clicking.

Ribbon: The big strip at the top with buttons. It has tabs like Home, Insert, Data, etc.

Formula Bar: The long white bar above the grid. It shows the contents or formula of the selected cell.

Name Box: The small box to the left of the Formula Bar. It shows the address of the selected cell (e.g., "A1").

Grid (Cells): The main area. Columns are letters (A, B, C) and Rows are numbers (1, 2, 3).

Status Bar: The bar at the very bottom. It shows info like "Ready" or the sum of selected cells.

Q12. Describe different types of charts in Excel and their usage in data visualization.

Charts are visual pictures of your numbers.

Column/Bar Chart: Uses bars to compare items (e.g., Sales in Jan vs. Feb).

Line Chart: Shows trends over time (e.g., Stock prices going up and down).

Pie Chart: Shows parts of a whole (e.g., Percentage of budget spent on food vs. rent).

Scatter Plot: Shows the relationship between two sets of numbers (e.g., Height vs. Weight).

Q13. Explain how VLOOKUP works with its syntax, parameters, and example.

VLOOKUP searches for a value in the first column of a table and returns a value in the same row from another column.

Syntax: =VLOOKUP(lookup_value, table_array, col_index_num, [range_lookup])

Parameters:

Lookup_value: What ID or name are you looking for?

Table_array: The range of the whole table.

Col_index_num: Which column number has the answer you want?

Range_lookup: FALSE for an exact match (usually used), TRUE for approximate.

Example: Looking for a student's name based on their Roll Number. =VLOOKUP(101, A2:C10, 2, FALSE) looks for Roll No 101 and gives the Name from column 2.

Q14. Write a detailed note on Pivot Charts and how they are created from PivotTables.

These are charts connected to a PivotTable. If you filter or change the PivotTable, the chart updates automatically to match.

How to create: Click on your existing PivotTable, go to the Insert tab (or Analyze tab), and select PivotChart. It works just like a normal chart but relies on the PivotTable data source.

Q15. What is consolidating data across multiple sheets or workbooks? Explain the steps involved.

Consolidating is combining data from multiple separate sheets into one single summary sheet (e.g., combining Jan, Feb, and Mar sales sheets into a "Q1 Total" sheet).

Steps:

Click on the cell where you want the result.

Go to Data tab -> Click Consolidate.

Select the Function (like SUM).

Browse and select the ranges from the different sheets you want to combine.

Click OK.

Q16. Explain the importance of cell formatting and how it helps in data presentation with examples.

Clarity: It distinguishes headers from data.

Readability: It makes large numbers easier to read (e.g., adding commas: 1,000,000).

Presentation: It makes the report look professional.

Example: If you type "0.1", it might be confusing. Formatting it as "10%" makes the meaning clear immediately.

Q17. Describe how Power Query is used to clean and transform data, including removing null values and duplicates.

Power Query is an advanced tool used to import data from various sources, clean it, and transform it before bringing it into Excel.

Cleaning Data: It can remove extra spaces, split columns (e.g., splitting "FirstLast Name"), and change data types.

Removing Nulls: You can filter out empty rows easily to keep the dataset clean.

Transformation: All changes are recorded as "steps," so you can re-run the cleanup on new data automatically.

Q18. What is VBA and why is it used in Excel? Explain its applications with examples.

VBA (Visual Basic for Applications) is the programming language used to write Macros. While a standard Macro records your clicks, VBA allows you to write code to do complex logic.

Why used: To automate tasks that are too complex for the simple macro recorder, or to create custom forms and buttons.

Example: Writing a script that checks a folder for new files, opens them, copies data, and emails a summary report to your boss every Monday morning.

Q19. Discuss best practices in Excel for organization, error prevention, and optimization.

Organization: Use clear headers in the first row. Use separate sheets for raw data (inputs), calculations, and final dashboards (outputs).

Error Prevention: Use Data Validation (Data tab) to restrict what users can type (e.g., forcing them to enter a date). Use simple formulas where possible.

Optimization: Avoid using too many volatile formulas (like TODAY or RAND) as they slow down the file. Remove unused empty rows/columns to keep the file size small.

Q20. Explain how linking and consolidating data help in effective data management and reporting in Excel.

Efficiency: You don't have to copy-paste data manually, saving time.

Accuracy: Reduces human errors because data updates automatically when the source changes.

Management: Helps in creating a "Master Report" from several smaller departmental reports, keeping data organized and up-to-date.

Module II

Q1. What is Data Science and what are its key steps?

Definition: Data Science is the study of data. It involves using scientific methods to extract knowledge and insights from messy data. It combines math, statistics, and computer science.
Key Steps:

Capture: Gathering raw data (from surveys, sensors, logs).

Process: Cleaning the data (removing errors, sorting).

Analyze: Looking for patterns and trends using models.

Communicate: Visualizing results (charts/graphs) to make decisions.

Maintain: Storing data for future use.

Q2. What is Tableau?

Tableau is a powerful Data Visualization and Business Intelligence (BI) tool.

It takes raw data (rows and columns) and turns it into understandable visual format (charts, graphs, maps).

It helps non-technical people understand data quickly without writing code.

Q3. List the Tableau data terminology.

Workbook: The entire Tableau file (like an Excel file).

Worksheet: A single tab where you create one chart.

Dashboard: A collection of several worksheets shown on one screen.

Story: A sequence of worksheets or dashboards that tells a narrative.

Dimensions: Fields containing text or dates (Qualitative data). Example: Names, Cities.

Measures: Fields containing numbers (Quantitative data). Example: Sales, Profit.

Q4. What is the difference between Google Data Studio and Tableau?

Google Data Studio (Looker Studio):

It is completely free and web-based.

Good for basic reporting and Google integration (like Google Analytics).

Less powerful for complex calculations.

Tableau:

It is a paid, professional desktop software (though a public version exists).

Extremely powerful for deep analysis and large datasets.

Can connect to almost any type of data source offline or online.

Q5. Explain the Tableau design flow.

The typical workflow when using Tableau is:

Connect: Open Tableau and connect to your data source (Excel, SQL, etc.).

Analyze: Drag and drop fields to explore data on a Worksheet.

Visualize: Create charts and format them (colors, labels).

Construct: Combine charts into a Dashboard or Story.

Share: Publish the workbook so others can see it.

Q6. Explain the data types in Tableau.

Tableau automatically detects the type of data in each column:

String (Text): Letters and words (Icon: Abc).

Number (whole): Integers like 1, 10, 500 (Icon: #).

Number (decimal): Floating numbers like 12.5, 3.14 (Icon: #).

Date: Dates only, e.g., Jan 1, 2023 (Icon: Calendar).

Date & Time: Date plus specific time (Icon: Calendar with clock).

Boolean: True or False (Icon: T|F).

Geographic: Locations like Country or City (Icon: Globe).

Q7. List out the navigation options in Tableau.

Start Page: The first screen where you open recent files or connect to data.

Data Source Page: Where you see your raw data and join tables.

Workspace (Sheet View): The main area with Shelves (Rows/Columns), Cards (Marks/Filters), and the Canvas.

Tabs (Bottom): Navigation between Sheets, Dashboards, and Stories.

Toolbar: Buttons at the top for Save, Undo, Sort, etc.

Q8. Explain the steps to connect Tableau to an Excel data source. List any three other common data source types Tableau supports.

Steps to Connect Excel:

Open Tableau Desktop.

On the left side under "Connect", click on Microsoft Excel.

A file window opens. Select your .xlsx file.

Click Open.

Three other data sources:

Text File: .csv or .txt files.

PDF File: Extracting tables from a PDF document.

MySQL / SQL Server: Connecting directly to a database server.

Q9. How do you change the data types in Tableau? Explain all three ways with steps.

Sometimes Tableau guesses wrong (e.g., treating a Zip Code as a Number instead of Geography).
Way 1: Data Source Page

Click the icon above the column header. Select the new type from the list.
Way 2: Data Pane (Sidebar)

Click the icon next to the field name in the left sidebar. Select the new type.
Way 3: Right-Click

Right-click the field name in the Data Pane -> Go to Change Data Type -> Select the type.

Q10. Explain the four types of joins available in Tableau using the given datasets.

Joins combine two tables based on a common column (like ID).

Inner Join: Keeps only rows that match in both tables. (Common data only).

Left Join: Keeps all rows from the Left table, and only matching rows from the Right. (If no match, it shows Null).

Right Join: Keeps all rows from the Right table, and only matching rows from the Left.

Full Outer Join: Keeps all rows from both tables. If they match, they join; if not, they appear with Nulls.

Q11. Explain how you would use the Split function to separate full names into first and last names. Include steps.

Scenario: Column "Customer Name" has "John Smith".
Steps:

Go to the Data Source page or Data Pane.

Right-click the "Customer Name" column.

Select Transform.

Click Split.

Tableau automatically creates two new columns: "Customer Name - Split 1" (John) and "Customer Name - Split 2" (Smith).

Q12. What is the difference between Split and Custom Split in Tableau?

Split (Automatic): Tableau guesses the separator (space, comma, hyphen) and splits all parts automatically.

Custom Split (Manual): You choose the specific separator (e.g., only split by "-") and you choose which columns to keep (e.g., "Only keep the first 2 columns").

Q13. How do you rename and duplicate a worksheet in Tableau? Why are these options useful?

How to Rename: Right-click the sheet tab at the bottom -> Click Rename.
How to Duplicate: Right-click the sheet tab -> Click Duplicate.
Why Useful:

Rename: Makes it easier to identify what chart is on the sheet.

Duplicate: Allows you to experiment. You can copy a complex chart, try new changes on the copy, and keep the original safe.

Q14. What is the use of “Replace Data Source” in Tableau?

This feature is used when you want to swap the file connected to your workbook without rebuilding your charts.

Example: You built a dashboard using a "Test_Data.xlsx" file. Now you want to connect it to the real "Live_Data.xlsx". You add the new source, then use Data -> Replace Data Source to switch everything to the new file instantly.

Q15. What is data blending in Tableau and how is it visually represented in a worksheet?

Definition: Data Blending allows you to mix data from two different sources on a single worksheet without permanently joining them. It works like a VLOOKUP for that specific sheet only.
Visual Representation:

The Primary data source (the main one) has a Blue Checkmark.

The Secondary data source (the blended one) has an Orange Checkmark.

The linking field (the common column) shows a small Orange Chain Link icon.

Module III

Q1. Explain the steps for visualization in Tableau.

Visualization means creating a chart or graph from your data.
Steps:

Connect to Data: Open Tableau and connect to your file (like Excel).

Go to Worksheet: Click on "Sheet 1" at the bottom.

Drag Dimensions: Drag a text field (like "Category") from the left panel to the Columns shelf.

Drag Measures: Drag a number field (like "Sales") from the left panel to the Rows shelf.

View Chart: Tableau automatically creates a bar chart. You can change it using the "Show Me" panel on the right.

Q2. Explain the steps to change the order in visualization.

Changing the order means sorting the data (e.g., from highest sales to lowest).
Steps:

Hover your mouse over the axis of the chart (e.g., the Sales axis).

You will see a small Sort icon (it looks like three bars). Click it once to sort descending (High to Low). Click it again for ascending (Low to High).

Alternative: Right-click the field in the Rows/Columns shelf -> Click Sort -> Choose "Ascending" or "Descending".

Q3. Explain the steps to change the summary in Tableau.

By default, Tableau sums up numbers (SUM). You might want the Average or Count instead.
Steps:

Go to the Measure field (green pill) in the Rows or Columns shelf.

Right-click on the field (e.g., SUM(Sales)).

Hover over Measure (Sum).

Select a different summary type from the list, such as Average, Median, Count, or Minimum.

Q4. List out the operators in Tableau in detail.

Operators are symbols used to perform calculations.

Arithmetic Operators: Used for math.

+ (Add), - (Subtract), * (Multiply), / (Divide).

Comparison Operators: Used to compare two values. result is True or False.

= (Equal to), > (Greater than), < (Less than), >= (Greater or equal), <> (Not equal).

Logical Operators: Used to combine conditions.

AND (Both must be true), OR (At least one is true), NOT (Reverses the result).

Q5. Explain the different types of logical functions in Tableau.

Logical functions test if a condition is true or false.

IF: Checks a condition.

IIF: A short version of IF (checks condition, gives value if true, gives value if false).

CASE: Checks one value against a list of possible matches.

ISNULL: Checks if a field is empty.

ZN: Returns zero if the value is null, otherwise returns the value.

Q6. Create a data source and apply IF-END, IF-ELSE-END, and IF-ELSEIF-ELSE-END and explain the scenario in detail.

Scenario: We are grading students based on their Score.

IF-END (Simple Check): Only cares about one specific thing.

Code: IF [Score] > 90 THEN "Top Student" END

Result: Only students with >90 get a label. Everyone else gets nothing (Null).

IF-ELSE-END (Two Options): Good or Bad.

Code: IF [Score] >= 50 THEN "Pass" ELSE "Fail" END

Result: Everyone gets a label. If 50 or more, "Pass". If less than 50, "Fail".

IF-ELSEIF-ELSE-END (Multiple Options): Grading A, B, or C.

Code:

IF [Score] >= 90 THEN "Grade A"
ELSEIF [Score] >= 75 THEN "Grade B"
ELSE "Grade C"
END


Result: Checks 90 first. If not, checks 75. If neither, gives "Grade C".

Q7. What are Quick Table Calculations? Explain the steps for creating quick table calculations.

These are pre-made calculations that allow you to analyze data quickly without writing formulas (like "Percent of Total" or "Running Total").
Steps:

Create a visual (e.g., Sales by Month).

Right-click on the Measure field (green pill) in the view (e.g., SUM(Sales)).

Select Quick Table Calculation.

Choose an option like Running Total or Percent of Total.

Q8. Explain the differences between FIXED, INCLUDE, and EXCLUDE LOD expressions with examples.

LOD (Level of Detail) expressions let you calculate numbers at a different level than your main chart.

FIXED: Ignores the chart's filters/view and looks only at what you specify.

Example: { FIXED [Region] : SUM([Sales]) }

Meaning: Calculates total sales per Region, even if your chart is showing sales by City.

INCLUDE: Adds more detail to the calculation than what is in the view.

Example: { INCLUDE [City] : AVG([Sales]) }

Meaning: Calculates the average sales including City details, even if only Region is in the view.

EXCLUDE: Removes detail from the calculation that is present in the view.

Example: { EXCLUDE [Region] : SUM([Sales]) }

Meaning: Calculates total sales ignoring the Region, even if Region is shown in the chart.

Q9. Explain the use of SUM, AVG, and COUNT functions in Tableau with examples.

SUM: Adds all values together.

Example: SUM([Profit]) gives the total profit of the company.

AVG: Finds the average value.

Example: AVG([Discount]) gives the average discount given to customers.

COUNT: Counts how many rows/items there are.

Example: COUNT([OrderID]) tells you how many orders were placed.

Q10. Write a calculated field to check if Profit is null using ISNULL. If yes, return "Missing", else "Recorded". Show this as a text table.

Steps:

Create Calculated Field named "Profit Status".

Formula:

IF ISNULL([Profit]) THEN "Missing"
ELSE "Recorded"
END


Drag "Profit Status" to Rows to see the table.

Q11. Write a CASE expression to classify Category as Furnishing, Tech Items, and Office Use.

Formula:

CASE [Category]
WHEN "Furniture" THEN "Furnishing"
WHEN "Technology" THEN "Tech Items"
WHEN "Office Supplies" THEN "Office Use"
ELSE "Other"
END


Q12. Explain the steps to create a calculated field in Tableau with an example.

Steps:

Click the small down arrow at the top of the Data pane (left side).

Select Create Calculated Field.

Name the field (e.g., "Profit Ratio").

Type the formula. Example: SUM([Profit]) / SUM([Sales]).

Click OK. The new field appears in your data list to use.

Q13. Explain the different types of aggregate functions.

Aggregate functions take many values and return a single summary number.

SUM: Total of values.

AVG: Average of values.

MIN: Smallest value.

MAX: Largest value.

COUNT: Number of records.

COUNTD: Count Distinct (number of unique items).

Q14. What is a Highlight Table in Tableau? Describe how it is created.

A Highlight Table is a text table where the background color of the cells changes based on the value (like a heat map with numbers).
Steps:

Drag a dimension (e.g., Region) to Rows.

Drag another dimension (e.g., Category) to Columns.

Drag a measure (e.g., Sales) to Text (this creates a plain table).

Drag the same measure (Sales) to Color.

Change the "Marks" card type from Automatic to Square. The cells will fill with color.

Q15. Explain the syntax and working of the CASE function in Tableau.

The CASE function is used when you want to compare one field against a specific list of values. It is often cleaner than using many IF-ELSEIF statements.

Syntax:

CASE [Field Name]
WHEN "Value1" THEN "Result1"
WHEN "Value2" THEN "Result2"
ELSE "Default Result"
END


Working: It looks at [Field Name]. If it matches "Value1", it outputs "Result1". If it matches "Value2", it outputs "Result2".

Q16. What is the difference between ISNULL, ZN, and IFNULL with examples?

These functions handle empty (null) data.

ISNULL: Returns TRUE if the value is missing, FALSE if it is there.

Usage: Used inside IF statements. IF ISNULL([Sales]) THEN...

ZN (Zero Null): If the value is null, it turns it into a 0. If it's not null, it keeps the number.

Example: ZN([Sales]) -> If Sales is blank, it becomes 0.

IFNULL: If the value is null, replace it with a specific value you choose.

Example: IFNULL([Region], "Unknown") -> If Region is blank, it says "Unknown".

Module IV

Q1. What do you mean by filtering? Explain the steps for filtering in Tableau.

Definition: Filtering means limiting the data shown in your chart. Instead of seeing everything, you only see specific parts (e.g., showing data only for the year 2023).

Steps:

Choose the field you want to filter (e.g., "Region").

Drag that field onto the Filters Shelf (the box above the Marks card).

A pop-up window appears. Select the items you want to keep (e.g., check "East" and "West").

Click OK. The chart now updates to show only that data.

Q2. Explain the different types of filters with examples.

Tableau processes filters in a specific order:

Extract Filters: Applied before data even loads into Tableau (e.g., Loading only "USA" data from the database).

Data Source Filters: Applied at the connection level.

Context Filters: The "Boss" filter that runs before normal filters.

Dimension Filters: Filtering text/categories (e.g., selecting "Furniture" from Category).

Measure Filters: Filtering numbers (e.g., Sales > 500).

Table Calculation Filters: Applied last, after the view is created.

Q3. What do you mean by Quick Filter? Explain the different types of Quick Filters.

Definition: A Quick Filter (now called "Show Filter") puts an interactive menu on the screen so the user can change the filter themselves without entering edit mode.

Types:

Single Value List: User can pick only one option (Radio buttons).

Multi Value List: User can check multiple boxes.

Dropdown: A list that expands when clicked (saves space).

Slider: A bar to slide for ranges (mostly for numbers/dates).

Wildcard Match: User types a word to search.

Q4. Explain the steps for creating a Quick Filter.

Drag a field (e.g., "Category") to the Filters Shelf.

Right-click the blue pill on the Filters Shelf.

Select Show Filter.

A control card appears on the right side of the screen for users to interact with.

Q5. What do you mean by Context Filter? Explain the steps for creating a Context Filter.

Definition: A Context Filter is a primary filter that creates a temporary subset of data. All other filters apply only to the data passed through the Context Filter. It improves performance and fixes "Top N" filter issues.

Steps:

Add a normal filter to the Filters Shelf (e.g., "Country").

Right-click that filter on the shelf.

Select Add to Context.

The filter turns Gray to show it is now a Context filter.

Q6. Explain conditional filtering in brief.

Conditional filtering means filtering data based on a rule rather than selecting items manually from a list.

Example: Instead of checking "Product A, Product B," you say "Show me any Product where Sales > $1000."

How: In the Filter dialog box, click the Condition tab and write your rule.

Q7. Briefly explain the slicing filter.

A slicing filter usually refers to a standard Dimension Filter that "slices" the dataset into smaller parts.

It allows you to view the data from a specific angle, like slicing a pie to look at just one piece (e.g., Slicing total sales to see only "California" sales).

Q8. What do you mean by grouping? Explain the two methods of grouping in Tableau.

Definition: Grouping is combining multiple members of a field into a single category. (e.g., Combining "Envelopes," "Paper," and "Labels" into a new group called "Stationery").

Method 1: Visual Grouping

Select the bars or points on the chart itself.

Click the Paperclip icon in the tooltip menu.

Method 2: From Data Pane

Right-click the dimension (e.g., Category) in the left Data pane.

Select Create -> Group.

Select items and click the Group button.

Q9. What do you mean by hierarchy? Explain the three methods of hierarchy in Tableau.

Definition: A hierarchy creates a parent-child relationship between fields, allowing you to "Drill Down" from summary to detail (e.g., Year -> Quarter -> Month).

Method 1: Drag and Drop

Drag a field (e.g., "City") and drop it directly on top of another field (e.g., "Country") in the Data pane.

Method 2: Right-Click

Right-click a field -> Hierarchy -> Create Hierarchy.

Method 3: Context Menu

Select multiple fields using Ctrl key, right-click, and choose Hierarchy -> Create Hierarchy.

Q10. Explain the concept of Sets and Combined Sets in Tableau.

Sets: A Set is a custom field that defines a subset of data based on some conditions. A row is either "In" the set or "Out" of the set. (e.g., A set of "Top 10 Customers").

Combined Sets: If you have two different sets, you can combine them to create a new one.

Q11. Differentiate between Sets and Combined Sets.

Set: Defines a group based on one logic (e.g., Top 10 customers by Profit).

Combined Set: Compares two existing sets using logic like:

Union: All members in Set A OR Set B.

Intersection: Members shared by BOTH Set A AND Set B.

Difference: Members in Set A but NOT in Set B.

Q12. What is a Parameter? Explain its steps.

Definition: A Parameter is a dynamic variable (like a placeholder number) that users can change to replace a constant value in calculations or filters. It allows "What-If" analysis.

Steps:

Click the arrow in the Data pane -> Create Parameter.

Name it (e.g., "Pass Mark") and set the Data Type (e.g., Integer).

Set current value (e.g., 50).

Important: You must use the parameter in a Calculated Field or Filter for it to work.

Right-click the parameter -> Show Parameter Control.

Q13. What are bins? Explain their usage and steps.

Definition: Bins are user-defined groupings of continuous data into equal-sized buckets.
Usage: Used to create Histograms. (e.g., Grouping ages into bins of 0-10, 11-20, 21-30).

Steps:

Right-click a Measure (e.g., Age or Sales).

Go to Create -> Bins.

Enter the Size of bins (e.g., 10).

Tableau creates a new dimension field for the bins.

Q14. Explain manual sorting in visualizations.

This is when you arrange the data in a specific order you want, not based on any math rule.

How: Drag the headers in the chart and drop them where you want them. For example, manually moving "March" to be before "February" (though that would be weird!).

Q15. Explain sorting by Data Source Order in visualization.

This sorts the data exactly as it appears in the original database or Excel file.

How: In the Sort menu, choose "Data Source Order". It resets any custom sorting.

Q16. Explain sorting by Field in visualization.

This sorts the data based on the values of a measure.

How: Sorting "Category" based on "Sum of Sales". The category with the highest sales goes first.

Q17. Differentiate between manual sorting and sorting by field in Tableau.

Manual Sorting: Static. You physically move "Product A" to the top. Even if Product A's sales drop to zero next month, it stays at the top because you put it there.

Sorting by Field: Dynamic. You tell Tableau "Sort by Sales." If Product A has the most sales today, it is at the top. If Product B sells more next month, Product B automatically moves to the top.

Q18. Create a bar chart in Tableau and change the order of regions in descending order of sales. Explain the process.

Drag Region to the Columns shelf.

Drag Sales to the Rows shelf (This creates a Bar Chart).

Look at the toolbar at the top of the screen.

Find the Sort Descending icon (it looks like bars getting smaller from top to bottom).

Click it. The bars will rearrange so the Region with the highest sales is on the left.

Q19. Describe how to apply conditional filters in Tableau using the given dataset and display only items where the amount is greater than 500.

Drag the field Amount (or the Item name if filtering by Item based on Amount) to the Filters Shelf.

A dialog box opens. Select All values (or Sum) and click Next.

Choose the At Least option.

Type 500 in the box.

Click OK.

The view now hides any rows where the amount is less than 500.

Module V

Q1. Explain the difference between a traditional funnel chart and a funnel chart created in Tableau.

Traditional Funnel Chart: In many other tools, a funnel chart is a specific, built-in 3D cone shape used to show stages in a process (like Sales: Lead -> Prospect -> Customer).

Tableau Funnel Chart: Tableau does not have a "Funnel" button in the "Show Me" panel. instead, you have to build it manually. You usually create it using a Bar Chart that is centered and sorted, or by using an Area Chart. It is more customizable but requires more steps to build than in other tools.

Q2. Explain the waterfall chart in Tableau.

A Waterfall chart shows the cumulative effect of positive and negative values. It is often called a "flying bricks" chart.

Usage: It explains how you got from a starting number to an ending number.

Example: Start with Gross Salary. Minus Tax (bar goes down). Minus Insurance (bar goes down). Equals Net Salary (final bar).

In Tableau: It is created using the Gantt Bar mark type and a Quick Table Calculation (Running Total).

Q3. Explain any five types of charts used in Tableau.

Bar Chart: Uses bars to compare categorical data (e.g., Sales by Product).

Line Chart: Uses a line to show trends over time (e.g., Stock price over a year).

Pie Chart: Uses slices of a circle to show parts of a whole (e.g., % of Budget).

Scatter Plot: Uses dots to show the relationship between two numbers (e.g., Advertising Spend vs. Sales).

Heat Map: Uses color intensity to represent values in a matrix (e.g., Darker red = Higher profit).

Q4. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of bar charts and stacked bar charts with examples.

Bar Chart:

Advantage: Easiest to read and compare lengths accurately.

Disadvantage: Takes up a lot of space if there are many categories.

Example: Comparing total sales of 5 different countries.

Stacked Bar Chart:

Advantage: Shows the total and the breakdown of parts in one bar. Saves space.

Disadvantage: It is hard to compare the segments in the middle because they don't start at the same baseline.

Example: Total sales per year, split by Product Category (Furniture, Tech, Office).

Q5. Explain the difference between a line chart and an area chart in Tableau with suitable business scenarios.

Line Chart:

Focus: Shows the direction of the trend (Up or Down).

Scenario: Analyzing whether the company's stock price is rising or falling over 12 months.

Area Chart:

Focus: Shows the volume or magnitude of the trend (The area under the line is filled).

Scenario: Showing total sales over time, stacked to see how much "Technology" contributed to the total volume compared to "Furniture".

Q6. Compare a scatter plot and a bubble chart in Tableau.

Scatter Plot:

Uses an X-axis and a Y-axis.

Best for finding correlations (relationships) between two specific measures (e.g., Height vs. Weight).

Dots are plotted on a grid.

Bubble Chart (Packed Bubbles):

Does not typically use axes.

Uses circle size to show a measure and color for categories.

Best for comparing relative sizes of many categories at once without worrying about specific XY coordinates.

Q7. Define a Gantt chart in Tableau and explain how it is constructed.

Definition: A Gantt chart is a project management tool. It shows tasks scheduled over time.

Construction:

Drag a Date field to Columns (Timeline).

Drag a Task Name to Rows.

Select Gantt Bar from the Marks card.

Drag the Duration (how long the task takes) to the Size shelf. This stretches the bar to cover the correct time period.

Q8. Illustrate the difference between a basic map and a geographic map in Tableau.

Symbol Map (Basic): places a shape (like a dot or square) at a specific location. The size of the dot can represent a value (Sales).

Filled Map (Choropleth): Fills the entire shape of the region (Country/State) with color. You cannot change the size of the shape, only the color.

Note: Both require geographic roles (Globe icon) assigned to the data fields (City, Country).

Q9. Evaluate how circle views differ from bubble charts.

Circle View: This is essentially a "Scatter plot" but often restricted to one dimension and one measure. The circles are aligned in columns or rows (e.g., Sales for each Category shown as circles on a straight line). It is organized.

Bubble Chart: The circles are "packed" together in a cluster to fit the space. They are not aligned to an axis. It is more artistic/visual but less precise for reading exact values.

Q10. Compare worksheet-level filters and dashboard-level filters and explain their effective use in a sales dashboard.

Worksheet-Level: The filter only changes the specific chart it is attached to.

Scenario: You filter the "Profit Map" to show only "2023", but the "Sales Bar Chart" next to it still shows all years. This can be confusing.

Dashboard-Level (Global): The filter is applied to multiple sheets at once.

Use: You enable "Apply to Worksheets" -> "Selected Worksheets" or "All Using This Data Source".

Scenario: A manager selects "West Region" on the dashboard filter. Instantly, the Map, the Bar Chart, and the KPI text all update to show only West Region data.

Q11. What is a dashboard in Tableau and how is it different from a worksheet?

Worksheet: A single canvas where you build one specific visualization (e.g., just a bar chart). It is the building block.

Dashboard: A canvas where you combine multiple worksheets into a single view. It allows you to see the "Full Picture" and interact with different charts simultaneously.

Q12. Differentiate between tiled objects and floating objects in Tableau dashboards with examples.

Tiled:

The charts snap into a grid layout. They do not overlap. If you resize one, the others adjust automatically.

Example: A neat 2x2 grid of four charts.

Floating:

The object floats on top of others (like a sticker). You can drag it anywhere, even partially covering another chart.

Example: Placing a small company logo or a "Help" button in the corner on top of a map.

Q13. Explain the process of adding, applying, and managing filters at the dashboard level in Tableau with business scenarios.

Process:

Add: Click on a chart in the dashboard -> Click the small down arrow -> Select Filters -> Choose the field (e.g., "Year"). The filter appears on the dashboard.

Apply: By default, it only filters that one chart. To make it global: Right-click the filter -> Apply to Worksheets -> All Using Related Data Sources.

Manage: You can format the filter (Dropdown, Slider) to make it user-friendly.

Business Scenario:
A generic "Executive Dashboard" shows total company sales. The CEO wants to investigate a slump in "Furniture." She uses a Category Filter (set to apply to all sheets). She selects "Furniture," and the entire dashboard (Sales trend, Regional map, Profit table) updates to show only Furniture performance, allowing her to spot the specific issue.

